209
tainted love: art’s ethos
and capitalization
suhail malik/
andrea phillips
France was again the target of jittery investors,
worried its top AAA credit rating is at risk.
Yields on its benchmark 10-year government
bonds climbed and their spread over Germany’s
equivalent bunds hit a record for the euro era.
Paris said the risk premium was “not justified.”
… Analysts warn it may well not be the steady
sale usually expected from a country with a
coveted AAA rating.
“The price action in European monetary union
(EMU) AAAs (excluding Germany) in the last
few sessions clearly highlights that it is not about
value in EMU AAAs at the moment. It is about
fear and positioning,” said Jamie Searle at Citi.1
One of the primary masks of capital is the naturalization
of its processes as inevitabilities. British Prime
Minister Gordon Brown’s language in the Autumn
of 2008—that the global financial crisis “happened
to us”—is testament to the rapid and strategic shifts
in alliances of power and profit that support crisis
economics. We were just in the wrong place at the
wrong time; it was chance that it happened to us; it
suhail malik/andrea phillips
210 211
was predetermined from above, and so on. The same
heady mixture of belief and money—or, more precisely,
naturalized urge camouflaging monetary transaction—
is evident in the art world when a collector buys or a
dealer sells an artwork on the basis of an inexplicable
and even capricious love. Just as “fear and positioning”
now motivate the price action in the EMU, the
same sensuous pathologization is evident in the elite
mechanisms of art buying and selling. We argue that
the love of art, here characterized as an ascendant
property of art market transaction beyond the normative
duties of care and control, is not simply a fetish
but a powerful agent in the further redistribution of
wealth, practiced in clear systemic collaboration with
artists, curators, critics, and other actors in contemporary
art’s infrastructure. As elaborated below, art is
situated as an “alternative” commodity in part because
of standard, received expectations of the personalities
and passions of both artists (as quixotic, passionate,
unpredictable) and their dealers and collectors (variously
holding back ready stock from the market, not
selling at the height of profit, etc.) The art market is in
this sense peculiar not simply because it lacks transparency
because of its unregulated, opaque, and inefficient
market but also because its trade is built on
the impulsive and chancy gesture of love. As we shall
see, such amorous/erotic transactions filter across the
private to the public sector as museum and state-run
galleries become increasingly reliant on the donations
and bequests of private collectors in order to maintain
both their permanent collections and temporary exhibitions,
thus significantly blurring the boundaries between
state care and private passion.
financialization of art
That such passions, chance encounters, and decisions
are irreducibly involved in the operations of
the art market perhaps accounts for the relative failure
of investment funds to rationalize it. In his comprehensive
overview of recent developments in the
contemporary art market Noah Horowitz remarks that
the art fund industry “is not only emblematic of the
enterprising new ways in which contemporary art is
sold and experienced, … nor of how the art economy
as a whole has embraced globalization; it is modern
global finance embodied.”2 However, we learn over
the ensuing pages that art investment funds—for
which art is an “alternative asset class” to standard
equities, shares, and bonds—have in fact not done
very well over the first decade of the twenty-first century.
Such funds have generally failed to draw in investors,
have “weak historical track records” on their
returns, dissolve, or have closed down (in the case of
Fernwood, one of the leading art funds, shutting shop
because of suspected embezzlement by its CEO).
These failures, together with the more general broken
optimism for art investment funds, could be taken as
an ironic confirmation that they did indeed embody
“modern global finance” over the decade to 2008, not
least in the leading role the global finance sector took
in bringing about the systematic social and economic
distress that has since ensued.
In light of all this it may seem perplexing if not perverse
to maintain that the art market can indeed be
understood as the embodiment of finance. Not that
this is Horowtiz’ claim: he remarks only that art investment
funds are such embodiments even though, as
we have seen, this is also why they have limited to no
suhail malik/andrea phillips
212 213
success in establishing themselves in the art market.
Yet, as we now argue, art does indeed embody the
truth of finance, and it does so precisely in its failure
or limitation as a kind of free-market investment. Proposing
as much not only allows the convergence of
interests and operations of art (in particular contemporary
art) and finance to be apprehended theoretically,
it also reconfigures the significance of what is
frequently heralded as the condition and satisfaction
of its collectors: their love of art.
Warranted though the acerbic identification of
the failure of art investment funds with modern global
finance may be, it leaves unexplained how and why
art investment funds in particular did not live up to the
promises made for them in the finance-led boom of
the mid-2000s. Horowitz presents many of these intrinsic
reasons, which arise mainly due to the particularities
of art as an investment. For example, it is highly
illiquid (it cannot be quickly converted into money
flows); it has many upfront and additional costs including
insurance, storage, handling, shipping, etc.;
it does not pay dividends or returns over the time it is
held by the investor, and so on. That art generates no
earnings until its sale but has ownership costs makes
it a “negative cash flow asset.”3 The particularities of
art as an investment are not, however, limited to its
material conditions and the requirements of preservation;
they also arise from the specificities of its trading,
which include “high transaction costs, … limited
arbitrage opportunities,”4 and highly “opaque market
information,” in that actual transaction prices are not
openly advertised outside of auction resales of art
(the secondary market) even as the manipulation of
these prices by the artists’ dealers is a well-known
part of such highly visible valuations. In other words,
the ownership and trade of art is far from being
the transparently- and openly-costed, easily-transferred,
low-maintenance circulation of claims that
modern global finance is built upon. On the one
hand, this is the advantage it is supposed to present
to art investors, who look to profit from the high
level of “asymmetrical information” offered by art’s
“pricing inefficiencies”5—that is, they deploy to
their advantage knowledge gained through closer
involvement with art dealers. On the other hand,
however, it means that art’s economy has a “weak
pricing system” because it “lacks a single generally
accepted valuation methodology,”6 such a methodology
being a primary and constitutive assumption
for the finance sector.
There are two interconnected aspects to this
weakness, one is theoretical-ideological, to which
we later return, the other is sociological-institutional:
that “art funds’ investment objective may be intrinsically
flawed”7 because the free-market precepts
core to such vehicles and their investors are in fact
inapplicable to art. In Horowitz’ wry words: because
such investment funds’ “vindication of art as an asset
class is based so strongly upon free-trade economic
theory, they may have underestimated the behavioral
aversion of the market … towards such unabated
speculation.”8 It is not only that the art market is
averse to the standard pricing mechanisms constitutive
of modern global finance’s operations and processes
but, moreover, that art dealers’ “antispeculative
vehemence” makes for “sound business sense.”
financialization of art suhail malik/andrea phillips
214 215
In fact, dealers’ suppression of the economic
[meaning here the free market principles underlying
modern global finance] … may ultimately
strengthen their financial prospects: collectors
continue to do business with them because they
trust their prices, and so the quality of their inventory.
… As goods leave the dealer’s inventory
and extend beyond the network of collectors who
comply with the first right of refusal, their control
over supply diminishes—and with it, their
monopolistic price control mechanism.9
“Antispeculative vehemence,” highly regulated trade,
tight control mechanisms on ownership and subsequent
resale; all of these standard business practices
are how and why dealers “strengthen” their market
share and are “commonly regarded” as better art
investors than art investment fund managers.10 But
if this is so it is because the methods and transactional
processes most successfully deployed in art’s
commercial markets contravene in almost every way
the free market principles and investment assumptions
and patterns core to “modern global finance.”
If such patterns are indeed embodied by art investment
funds it is little surprise that they tend to fail so
often or remain so modest. Equally, anti-speculative
vehemence is intimately allied to the amorous/erotic
involvement in art, widely flaunted in the acquisition
of blue-chip art and the cloying discourses and beliefs
of central figures in both public and private art
sectors who support and rely upon such collectors.
But such artworks—and therefore artists—are bluechip
precisely because they return a consistently high
price on both primary and secondary markets. This
art is the “royalty” of the art market (just as the “blue”
of blue-chip is said to derive from “blue blood”); the
prizes in private and public art collections the world
over (local cultural significations and traditions notwithstanding).
If you have a Picasso or a Warhol
in your museum (currently and colloquially, the safest
bets, the bluest chips) you are likely to ride the
storm of any market crash. Thus the game of betting
is played by those who like to feign at gambling and
have the means to do so. The term “blue-chip,” applied
to companies that are regarded as “safe bets” on a
stock exchange—corporations of any type that perform
consistently well and operate profitably through
ups and downs—is notably transferred to the informal
“ratings” mechanisms of the art market, evidencing
the relationship between luck and profit actualized in
art investments. The term derives from poker, where
a blue chip is valued higher than a red or white chip.
Evidently, the game of chance, for those that can or
must play it, transitions neatly across money actions,
and the “safe bet” epitomizes in its “anti-speculative
vehemence” the critical link between risk and aspiration,
the brag of profit and the depths of loss.
The idea of a safe bet is, of course, a non-sequitur;
wished for in all capital transactions, the safe bet is
perhaps especially and dramatically apparent in the
art market. Gambling on art is then only a specific
type of investment, in which the passion of the game
is matched by other passions—the love of art and the
performative instantiation of that love on and through
“buying action.” The titillation of such an ethos for
the “civilian” onlooker is clear in the popularity of art
financialization of art suhail malik/andrea phillips
216 217
auction and art opening features in popular newspapers
and magazines, as well as in the sales of semiserious
research publications giving an “insider” and
interview-based account of dealing and collecting.11
Such marketplace hagiographies attempt to make
public the private world of art dealing, yet they isolate
the privacy of monetary transaction to the shock and
awe of numerology (in the sense that the cash figures
are dramatically and thus mystically out of reach). It is
these forms of action, private yet made public in the
glare of gossip after art auctions (the secondary market)
and through rumor and the awarding of prestige
and cultural capital through deals made with art galleries
and art consultants (primary market), that are
under examination.
Spending on blue-chip art—a practice already
made paradoxical and thus separate from standard
stock and share transactions through the concept
of “safe betting”—ties the buyer into an interested
bundle of socio-cultural mechanisms whereby the
action of spending money is primarily seen as quixotic
and impulsive, and only secondarily, if at all,
as investment-based. Drawing on the research of
Raymonde Moulin on the French art market and
connoisseurship in the 1960s, Ulf Wuggenig points
to the relation between amateurism, defined as
the engagement in an activity for pleasure rather
than profit, and love (amator—lover). Reflecting on
Moulin’s interviews with collectors, and quoting
Pierre Bourdieu, Wuggenig says, “their self image
was that they collected not for instrumental reasons
but for the ‘love of art’—and more particularly for the
sort of ‘pure love’ that has its roots in the ideology
of charisma; a love ‘irreducible to money and any objects
of bourgeois interest.’”12
The centrality of this amorous ethos to the concentration
of social and capital power in art of course
relies upon and maintains the belief that while art is
indeed traded on a market it is the very obstruction of
that market to liberal free-market principles and practices
that accords with an involvement in art itself.
The art market is rather a market of “care,” deemed to
be appropriate to art because art itself is decontaminated
from capital accumulation.13 Through art and
the love of art, wealth and power excuse themselves;
they demonstrate their ethos of human passions over
that of money. Interviewing the art consultant Philippe
Ségalot about how he finds and matches the right
artwork to a buyer, Sarah Thornton asks:
How does Ségalot know when he has encountered
the right work? “You feel something,” he
says with fervour. “I never read about art. I’m not
interested in the literature about art. I get all the
art magazines, but I don’t read them. I don’t want
to be influenced by the reviews. I look. I fill myself
with images. It is not necessary to speak so
much about art. I am convinced that a great work
speaks for itself.” A faith in gut instinct is common
to most collectors, consultants and dealers, and
they love to talk about it.14
The asymmetrical shape of the art market is concomitant
with the collector being a lover. This in turn renders
the market one of passion—a passion built on
the eroticism of impulsive taste and fueled by dealers
financialization of art suhail malik/andrea phillips
218 219
and consultants formulating that love competitively.
Such incalculable passion is the avowed ethos not
just of the agents in the art market but of art’s institutionalization
more generally; it is the identifying assumption
as to why one would be involved in art at all.
But while it is relatively easy to characterize the impulsive
collector as a pathological subject, or the aggregate
movements of the art market to be of behavioral
rather than rational economics,15 a more complicated
and more urgent issue is the relation between the
convenience of that pathology (the irrational collector
who bankrupts him or herself in the name of love for a
particular artist’s work, for example) and the method
of accumulation as it is signaled by art’s price. Our
interest is precisely the logic of the relation between
the art market’s price-setting mechanisms and the
evident “irrationality” of art’s pricing in relation to production
costs or other supposed “real” bases for pricing.
We aim here to remove the (proto-ideological)
support for the decontamination of power through
art’s ethos, which is no less a moral-affective support
for finance gained by the separation in principle of
economy (price), social order, and art, the rationality
of one being opposed to the irrationality of the other.
The rationality of the liberal markets and the art market’s
countermanding of it are central to the more
theoretically-ideologically situated aspect of art’s
“weak pricing system.” Not only are art prices on the
primary market set “monopolistically,” but these prices
do not observe the basic diktats of modern economic
theory: “art investors cannot simply determine the discounted
value of its future cash flows, as is common
place in the equity and real estate markets”16—or indeed
any conventional pricing calculation deployed
in liberal economic theory. As Jonathon Nitzan and
Shimshon Bichler explain, this formula “tells us how
much a capitalist is prepared to pay now”—the price—
“to receive a flow of money later,” reducing “a future
stream of earnings to their present value.”17 For Nitzan
and Bichler “capitalization” is defined by the process
of “reducing” earnings to their present value together
with the ordering of that which is thus priced.18 In contrast
to the supposed universal salience of this pricing
formula, which is core to neoclassical economic
dogma, art has no basis for its future earnings other
than speculative guesses. The best the art buyer can
do is “make an educated bet that the price of an artwork
may rise in the future, but calculating such gains
is hardly a perfect science”19—hence the problematic
relation between investment fund strategies, which assume
such pricing formulas, and art market dealings,
which decry them. Contrary to this apparently irreducible
incongruity, Nitzan and Bichler propose that the
neoclassical formulation of price is itself a falsehood
if not a mystification. The unsurmountable problem it
faces is that since expected earnings are gained in the
future, those earnings and therefore the rate of return
are in fact unknown and only speculative expectations.
Furthermore, since the expected rate of return is calculated
on the basis of future earnings, it is not even
known if variables in this “elementary” calculation of
capitalization are interrelated or not. The core formula
for the neoclassical price-setting model thus says
nothing to the content or relation of its determinants.
Or then price. In other words, standard price-setting is
financialization of art suhail malik/andrea phillips
220 221
never in fact the “discount value of future cash flows.”
While the pretence that price can be calculated
on the basis of discounted earnings can be mostly
maintained by reference to a “real economy” of earn
-
ings, debts, production, and so on
—all of which can
be called upon as a supposed basis for calculating
“future earnings” and “rates of return”
—its actual im
-
plausibility is wholly apparent in art’s price-setting, as
Horowitz recognizes. In other words, the price-setting
of art reveals capitalization as such, without the le
-
gitimizing, retro-fitted measurements and theories
seeking to justify earnings on the basis of production
(Marxism) or consumption (neoclassical liberalism).
That is, the art market demonstrates the truth of all
price-setting: that there is no basis in production or
consumption for pricing, only capitalization. In itself,
this result is hardly news: art prices cannot be ratio
-
nalized by reference to production.20 But its deriva
-
tion from Nitzan and Bichler’s theory of capitalization
brings with it two important corollaries, which return
to the sociological-institutional conditions of art and
its market:
(i)
If art prices are explicitly financially generated
without reference to production, they make
manifest the condition of all price-setting, or
what could be called capital’s procedural and
operational “fincanciality” (the term is not Nitzan
and Bichler’s). Financiality here designates that
finance is a primary condition for, rather than con
-
sequence of, capitalization and price-setting and
that, as such, price and capital are not predicated
on production, use-value, consumption, or other
bases external to finance.21 It is not then that art
pricing is a puzzle compared to other, produc
-
tive or consuming, sectors of the economy, but
that the art market dispels their obscuring of
capitalization as the primary determinant of price
(which is also why its price-setting mechanisms
present such a practical and theoretical difficulty
to neoclassical and Marxian (NCM) accounts).
For Horowitz, the only tendentious salience of
standard theories of price-setting to art is the fact
that art has a “weak pricing system.” And while it
is indeed “weak” from the perspective
of the neoclassical precepts to which
Horowitz subscribes, it is for just that reason
a pronounced example of the conditions of
capitalization as Nitzan and Bichler account for
it, namely that “all capital is finance and only fi
-
nance.”22
(ii)
As Horowitz observes, interest from regular
financial investment funds in the art market
tends to go rather badly thanks to the
“monopolistic price control mechanisms” of the
primary market. Nitzan and Bichler’s notion of
capitalization, however, proposes that such mo
-
nopolistic price controls are not the exception
in price-setting but the standard. In particular,
the primary market is only a trenchantly orga
-
nized market of “administered prices” that are
financialization of art suhail malik
/andrea phillips
222 223
usual business practice. Administered prices
stabilize earnings on the basis of the markup on
their wares.23 As for the primary art market, such
prices are set by highly concentrated and often
colluding businesses and sectors. More exactly,
administered prices are a form of control over
prices and represent the “degree of monopoly”
of the firm over the market. Horowitz’ remark is
then a recognition from inside the neoclassical
paradigm that the primary market is one of administered
prices.
That capitalism’s financiality is independent of its putative
justification of production is, however, only a
partial result in Nitzan and Bichler’s larger and more
general claim, which they make following Thorstein
Veblen’s distinction between generalized social production
(industry) and private ownership (business).
Industry is “an integrated creative process whose
productivity derives from the totality of its purposeful
resonating pulses,”24 the latter phrase meaning
the integrated effects of production across society.
Business, on the other hand, is the “power process
carried out through the prerogatives of ownership.”25
For Nitzan and Bichler the primary question core to all
capital accumulation is “how does private ownership
‘generate’ earnings?”26 They note that the etymology
of private is from the Latin privatus, “restricted,” and
related to privare, “to deprive.” Private ownership is
for them the “power principle of capitalism” not because
“it enables those who own” but because, as
just noted, “it disables those who do not.” To use
their local example, not being able to transfer Warren
Buffet’s assets to anyone at all is an issue of ownership
not technical limitation. In more general terms, private
ownership is the condition of capitalism because “it is
wholly and only an institution of exclusion, and institutional
exclusion is a matter of organized power.” What
is key here is that ownership is not productive per se
since it “has no bearing” on industry intrinsically, and
certainly does not add to it. Industry and business are
different in kind. But business can profit by gaining an
advantage over industry it does not own by damaging
it, and thereby lowering the maximization of industry
overall. Sabotage is then the condition and actuality
of capital earnings. Furthermore, since business capital
necessarily sabotages industry, capital is then not
just sometimes unproductive with regard to industry
but is necessarily counterproductive.27 In stark contrast
to the shared tenets of NCM paradigms, capital
always lessens industry rather than profiting from its
increase: “the only way for capitalists to profit from
productivity is by subjugating it and limiting it. And
since business earnings hinge on strategic sabotage,
their capitalization represents nothing but incapacitation.”28
Sabotage is the shaping of generalized industry,
ordering it to specific and particular interests; it is
a technique of concentrating power. As such, capitalization
is a social ordering for the sake of privatized
earnings and is therefore directly power. Economy
is then always and necessarily a political economy;
there are no “free” markets.
While this general result holds for art as it does
for anything else that is capitalized, what is specific
about art’s financiality is that because art prices are
set with reference to nothing but its financiality and
financialization of art suhail malik/andrea phillips
224 225
as its market is so highly administered, art prices
explicitly demonstrate the ordering and sabotage of
general production by and for private earnings.29 Art
prices are unequivocal instantiations of capital-power
without any recourse to socio-political accountability.
In these terms, the difference between art’s primary
and secondary markets is that such sabotaging capi
-
talization
—the degree of monopoly, the concentration
of institutionalized power—is greater in the primary
market, while the demonstration of sabotage is more
overt in the secondary market. These two aspects are
in no sense contradictory nor do they even contravene
one another as in the “Hostile Worlds” scenario in
which art and money do not touch, identified by Olav
Velthuis to be commonly mobilized by agents defend
-
ing the monopoly of the primary market against the
encroachments of the secondary, often by recourse
to the impassioned ethos of the former.30 Rather, both
markets are effectively mobilized together to further
increase the total and specific “degrees of monopoly”
of capital power. This result accords with the obser
-
vation that for all the drama concerning the shifting
power and positioning of the two markets with re
-
gard to one another, in practice both are deployed by
the same agents as part of their standard business
operations; and, that the degree of monopoly over
prices is never really weakened by competitive sales
but only differently administered (art does not com
-
pete against other art in arriving at its price; it is only
ever a question of the markup).
Identifying art’s financiality with sabotage enables
yet further characteristic features of art’s current in
-
stitutional ethos to be systematically accounted for:
— Since sabotage is a necessarily social act
of institutional ordering and exclusive priva
-
tion, capitalization cannot be analytically or
practically separated from social organization.
In particular, wealth accumulation is not ana
-
lytically or practically distinct from symbolic,
cultural and technical power. The integrity of
political economy proposed by Nitzan and
Bichler’s theory of capital power thus
dispenses with the explanatory categories
established by Pierre Bourdieu of symbolic
or cultural capital, or of direct and indirect
capital, which presume a difference in kind
between economic capital and social capital
where the latter is mobilized in the service
of the former.31 Rather, and as art clearly in
-
stantiates, prices are correlated at once and
necessarily with cultural or symbolic institution
-
alization. “Values” of many kinds are intimately
coordinated in a nexus or complex that inte
-
grates meaning and its (dis)establishment, “in
-
tellectual property,” social status, money, pricesetting
mechanisms, and so on. Art prices thus
rescind the “Nothing But” paradigm, in which
the value of art is determined simply and exclu
-
sively by its price.32
— Art’s marketization is constituted by its finan
-
ciality, without reference to its production, or
the basis for production, or even its products.
In particular, art’s marketization is not an issue
of commodification, or of art’s content. The
influential Marxian disputes on this identifica
-
financialization of art suhail malik
/andrea phillips
226 227
tion result from an anxious recognition of the
historical error of art’s commodity status in
contradistinction to another kind of production
that would somehow free it from its marketi
-
zation. In this they base art in production
—
perhaps even the generalized production of
industry at large
—and look to surpass art’s
financiality for this reason. However, capital
-
ization qua sabotage is wholly indifferent to
production: it makes no odds to capitaliza
-
tion how or why production takes place, only
that some production is to be institutionally
affirmed and others sabotaged (thus reduc
-
ing industry overall). Whether or not art is a
commodity is no issue for its capitalization, the
question having no traction on its financiality.
— Similarly, looking to the (individual or collective)
artist as the basis and condition of art in
need of support against the depredations of
marketization and institutionalization (inflicted
by those very markets and institutions) is an
appeal to a return to production as the basis
for art’s value. When such appeals act as a
moral vindication of the ethos of art’s financial
-
ity (selling the artist’s work is for the benefit of
the artist), the artist acts a compensatory fable
for the continued sabotage art’s institutional
capitalization inflicts on general production.
Art’s amorous ethos looks to individualize and
give alibi to ownership-sabotage by configur
-
ing the artist as a unique producer of original
works who, on the basis of their putative
autonomy, is then a legitimizing figure of highly
monopolistic production that is itself emblem
-
atic of the configuration of business-sabotage
contra social industry.
— The now standard critique proposing art to be
irreducible to capital and the latter’s culture
because of art’s unproductivity, dejection,
non-perfomance, failure, useless expenditure,
and so on (in short, the Adornian-BeckettianBataillean
repertoire) advocates a cultural
determination of art qua sabotage. Accepting
this “Hostile Worlds” paradigm of art comple
-
ments art’s financiality even as these countercapitalist
theories claim to contend it. These
institutionally stable discourses thus take a
leading role in the justification and legitima
-
tion
—the remoralization
—of institutional
sabotage, most notable perhaps in the sup
-
port they give to the highly concentrated
monopolies of art already in place and the
prevailing social power represented thereby.
The continuity of interests between financiality
and such prevalent critical claims is evidenced
by the their centrality in the marketization of art
through theoretically-informed journalism.
If it’s a commonplace that art’s financiality damages
a more general proliferation of “art” simply because
the art market excludes more art than it includes, the
analysis proposed here offers a different, specific
determination of the damage inflicted by art’s finan
-
ciality: it is a sabotage of art as a part of general
financialization of art suhail malik
/andrea phillips
228 229
production, as industry. Art’s price indexes the power
of such sabotage in the terms set out by that sabotage.
Art’s capitalization is not then predicated on
aesthetic-artistic determinations but sociologicalfinancial
power; or, at least, the power concerns of
institutional capitalization determine its aestheticartistic
interests. Art’s amorous/erotic ethos is a crucial
medium of transmission between the two: the implementation
of power-sabotage is authorized by the
common yet unaccountable enactment of the love of
art, which in any given case is an irreducible element.
Such institutional power is on the one hand fashion
within art, in which every party looks to every other for
an unaccountable and otherwise criteria-less validation
of what counts as worthwhile art. And on the other
hand it is the prevailing institutional insistence on
presenting work of putative “quality” and “value.” The
assumed obviousness (and consequent consent)
enforced by such terms inflicts in morally protected
form the social sabotage of a power that need not
account for itself but is simply occasioned by its claims
on/through art.
The love for art declared not only by collectors but
also by any of its agents is the subjective, privatized
account of such a morally protected sabotage power.
It is an ethos. While such power equal to capitalization,
and thus finance, is perhaps most evident with
the collector-dealer nexus, where monetary transactions
are most palpable, it is by no means restricted
to these actors since capitalization is a matter of general
social ordering organized through private ownership.
The reorganization of power legitimized through
art’s amorous ethos has both subjective and public
aspects of its privatization, which are interrelated. The
subjective account requires one last visit to the derivation
of price-setting as institutional sabotage.
Given that art has “little intrinsic worth” in terms of
material costs,33 art’s financiality is only another way of
saying that prices are set almost entirely by its markup.34
If one of the standard puzzles in art-pricing is how
to justify prices in “fundamentals” beyond hype and
risk, Nitzan and Bichler’s derivation of pricing suggests
that prices in general have no foundation in objective
conditions such as production but are predicated only
on convention (historical earnings and a standard rate
of return) and a subjectively determined speculative
zeal or positioning, which is a trade-off between hype
and risk above a standard rate of return.35 Moreover,
while the sabotage business inflicts upon industry in
general is a consequence of sectorial-collective sabotage
(outlined above for art as the appeal to “quality”
and “excellence”), that sabotage is nonetheless undertaken
for earnings made by private ownership and
is exclusively against industry. There is then a private,
subjective correlate to the sectorial sabotage of capitalization
and, in particular, its positioning. When speculative
zeal is low (hype is low or outweighed by the
risk coefficient)—as when markets contract or, with
art, the speculative interest is directed towards art that
is not secured by power (or reputation, another name
for sectorial sabotage)—the general name for this private,
subjective correlate is fear. When hype is high
or outweighs risk—when positioning is highly positive,
as it is with blue-chip art—the received name in art’s
ethos for the private subjective dimension of sabotage
is love. Love completes the logic of the privatizing
financialization of art suhail malik/andrea phillips
230 231
sabotage of production in general; it is the confirmation
of power over the social order through capitalization
pursued through institutions. Love is but the private,
subjective—and therefore capricious, owned—positive
positioning of art’s capitalization.
The love of art is thus still a “source of legitimacy”
for empire-making allied to capitalization; it is how
sabotage can be privately and publicly vindicated.36
Looking at the recent history of this socio-cultural
privatization, the political economy of culture, in Europe
and North America, it is clear that the hierarchies
ascribed through such territory-building projects have
dissipated to a major extent through the reorganization
of fiscal power mechanisms at a transnational scale,
prioritizing revenue for the type of finance that works
beyond the simple philanthropic, charitable gestures
of previous decades, and beyond the clear territorialization
of ownership. Love has no borders. Playing the
risky game of buying and selling art not for profit but
because you love art and are perhaps addicted to its
irrationalities and impulses in some way is a sure fire
method of distracting a public gaze, which accepts the
distinction between capitalization and love, from questions
concerning the deep inequalities caused by your
wealth accumulation or indeed the investments you
may make in order to produce that wealth. Such disconnection
between normative investment and return
methodologies and the practices of the contemporary
art market leave stranded a welfare state model of public
art beneficence, which the funders are simply unable
(though of course not unwilling—in fact have no
choice but) to compete with. This suggests a marked
shift in the modes through which art is distributed and
displayed, and accounts for much of the pandering and
groveling that takes up an increasing percentage of the
time of all publicly-funded galleries and museums. The
sheer fact that “public” art museums and galleries in
many parts of the world are now being predominantly
funded by private donation attests to this. Once the imbrication
of private patronage in spaces once deemed
ideologically public is complete it becomes clear that
contemporary art, its production and curation, becomes
an advanced mechanism of experimentation for
the sabotage of (ideologies of) access and equality.
Taking art’s institutional capitalization to be a mode of
sabotage vectored/legitimized through an amorous/
erotic ethos then permits a number of medium-term
future scenarios for the political economy of art and
the privatization of care to be anticipated. Though
practically-integrated, these transformations can be
thematically demarcated as follows:
I
capital
Despite the claims of the art investment sector
that it is counter-cyclical or uncorrelated to the
movements of broad equities markets, the art
market is entirely dependent on the available
cash flows or liquidity available to higher-income
earners.37 Two schematic scenarios can then be
put forward for the decade from 2012, depending
on the fate of the finance sector and private
wealth accrual in the period.
financialization of art suhail malik/andrea phillips
232 233
(i)
an increase in liquidity (which is not to say
a strengthening of wider economies) will
strengthen the art market, which will be most
ostentatiously marked by escalating prices for
blue-chip work. The “Hostile Worlds” scenario
between primary and secondary markets will
be resurrected, but as mock-battles because
all sides will increase the power of art’s institu
-
tional capitalization against (art’s) industry. The
characteristic ethos of art will concentrate power
with even greater degrees of monopoly to those
who are most able to love art subjectively
—that
is, without care for what that love means, how it
is constituted, and what it more generally reorga
-
nizes. The period of the art market slump, 2009–
201X, will be seen as a valuable “correction” in
an otherwise continually developing market of
privately recognized “quality” and “excellence.”
Dominant art institutions will exacerbate this
concentration of power.
(ii)
Fragile or thinning liquidity in the coming period
will result in a contraction of the total market,
again putatively intensifying a conflict between
primary and secondary markets but increasing
their co-dependency to secure a shrinking capital
base. In this scenario, power will again be con
-
centrated but the appeal to subjectively private
love as its legitimizing ethos will probably be less
prevalent as art will seek to gain greater moral
value in order to stabilize capitalization in terms
other than those of wealth accumulation. Here,
terms such as “quality” and “excellence” will be
contested as public-collective (moral) claims
rather than privatized gain, but will again, for this
reason of securing power, mark the sabotaging
institutionalization and marketization of art.
II
institutional infrastructure
It’s said that you can’t help who (or what?) you
fall in love with. In loving art and playing safe bets,
modern and contemporary art collectors mask,
inadvertently or not, their worldly dealings. Soci
-
ologies of collecting, whilst often focusing either
on museums and patronage or the oddities of
obsessive collectors of everyday objects, throw
light on the relation between collecting and forms
of domination, but they do so under the terms of a
type of statist thinking that the buyers and sellers
of contemporary art now move far beyond. John
Elsner and Roger Cardinal, for example, propose
that “if the peoples and the things of the world are
collected, and if the social categories into which
they are assigned confirm the precious knowl
-
edge of culture handed down through genera
-
tions, then our rulers sit atop a hierarchy of collec
-
tors.”38 The rise of the private museum, its public
accessibility, its collection built on the impulsive
and quixotic taste of its owner (in fact advised by
financialization of art suhail malik
/andrea phillips
234 235
a group of arts consultants and public museum
directors hoping to gather some crumbs), attests
to a pathological and political shift from a culture
of care to a culture of love within the dominant
structures of neoliberal states.39 If care is what
the state-funded arts were supposed to do, either
through psychic and experiential transformations
of the viewer or through participation in programs
of community cohesion, such narratives of amelio
-
ration and healing of publics have been replaced
by privatized love. The private collector, making
his or her mark, through the use and abuse of his/
her own passions by trading art, no longer does
so on the basis of a public’s expectation of benefit
(he is not doing it to “do good”). This is not the
field of patronage developed in the industrial age
of Europe and North America. Instead of a gen
-
eral commitment to care (however homogenized
and hierarchized this system of care was), private
art buyers care for their own passions and then
allow the public to see glimpses of them though
the gauze of mediators, arts consultants, and the
like. Rather than be understood as a neo-feudal
arrangement, here the previously state-organized
public is demanded to share in the love of art
on the terms of private corporatism. The new
museum (The New Museum?) is identified as a
location in which any civilian can participate
—
publicly
—in the spectacle of elite spending, doing
so in the sharing or appreciation of a privatized
love. This endemic configuration of people, space,
and shared but unequal love will be the ever more
prevalent shape of public galleries and museums
over at least the next two decades as this type of
inventive public-private methodology becomes in
-
creasingly necessary to maintain institutions in the
wake of the decline of state funding for culture.
III
reputational venues
If privatized sabotage becomes more prominent as
the organizing principle of art and its institutional
-
ization, then institutional capitalization and its
attendant prestige- and reputation-building of art
will shift more decisively to overt market-based
organization
—notably, from biennials to art fairs.
Given the importance of prioritizing subjective
positioning as a condition for art’s institutional
capitalization, and the importance of providing
an ersatz public service, these procedures of
legtimization are not conducted through the vend
-
ing formats and venues themselves but the prolif
-
eration of off-site projects (entry to which is only
sometimes charged). Such projects rely upon the
veneer of a “Hostile Worlds” scenario internal to
the primary market itself, allowing the love of art
“for its own sake” to continue to be materialized
and specified at precisely the point of its most
intense sites of marketization. If the availability of
such art fair project programs to the public is a
leading factor in their presentation, the transforma
-
tion of state-level organization by capitalization and
its private solace again comes to the fore.
The availability of art to a (bourgeois) public was
financialization of art suhail malik
/andrea phillips
236 237
the task of the national museum and, in post-war
Europe, the biennial, overcoded as these were
by a pedagogic-formative command typical of
modernizing industrial nation-states seeking (to
project) a public base. The art fair project re
-
places this complex network of institutional and
social care, in which culture and art might have
acted as vectors of common identification, with
the eliciting and adulation of private excitements;
a dab of knowledge-generation in such projects
allows them to also take on the mantel of cultural
education from that previous formation. Yet what
is public here is not a common or collective task
but subjective positioning, the power of private,
speculative zeal we are all permitted to occasion
-
ally taste.
notes
1 Graeme Wearden and Katie Allen,
“Eurozone Bond Markets in Turmoil
as France and Germany Dig in over
ECB,” guardian.co.uk, November
16, 2011, www.guardian.co.uk
/business/2011/nov/16
/eurozone-bond-markets-germany
-ecb/.
2 Noah Horowitz, Art of the Deal:
Contemporary Art in a Global Finan
-
cial Market (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2011), 145.
3 Ibid., 170. 4 Ibid., 170. 5 Ibid., 174. 6 Ibid., 170. 7 Ibid., 186. 8 Ibid., 188. 9 Ibid., 176.
10 Ibid., 177.
11 Sarah Thornton, Seven Days in the
Art World (London: Granta, 2009);
Don Thompson, The $12 Million
Stuffed Shark: The Curious Econom
-
ics of Contemporary Art and Auction
Houses (London: Aurum, 2008).
12 Ulf Wuggenig, “Attached by an
Umbilical Cord of Gold,” Texte Zur
Kunst 83 (September 2011): 56.
13 Suhail Malik, ‘‘Critique as Alibi:
Moral Differentiation in the Art Mar
-
ket,” Journal of Visual Art Practice,
Special Issue on Critique, ed.
Mary-Anne Francis, 7:3 (December
2008): 283–295.
14 Thornton, Seven Days in the Art
World, 10.
15 Horowitz, Art of the Deal, 173.
16 Ibid., 170.
17 Jonathan Nitzan and Shimshon
Bichler, Capital as Power: A Study
of Order and Creorder (London:
Routledge, 2009), 153 and 183.
18 In order to keep the main text on
topic, details of Nitzan and Bichler’s
argument are relegated to the foot
-
notes with references to Capital as
Power in parentheses. Capitalization
for Nitzan and Bichler “represents
present value of the future stream
of earnings” (153). Price is “the unit
with which capitalism is ordered”
and the “pattern of order
—namely,
the way in which prices are struc
-
tured and restructured relative to one
another
—is governed by capitaliza
-
tion” (153). The argument in the
main text depends on the following
schematic formulation of capitaliza
-
tion (185–192, paraphrased in the
following lines and in n. 34 below):
representing capitalization at a
certain time as
Kt
, earnings as
E, and
the rate of return as
r, the formula of
capitalization is:

(A)
Kt =
E /
r

(The / operator marks a division,
which finds the ratio between the
quantities on either side of it. Below, x is the operation of multiplication of
the quantities on either side; op
-
erations in brackets are carried out
before the operator outside of them.)
 To take the simplest example,
expected earnings of
€1000 at 5
percent interest rate over a year re
-
quire an initial capitalization (invest
-
ment) of 1000 / 0.05, or
€20,000.
Price can be directly formulated in
terms of capitalization through the
example of shares. The share price
for a company at a given time (
P
t
) is
its total capitalization (
Kt ) distributed
over the total number of shares (
N).
The price per share is also the pres
-
ent value of the perpetual earnings
per share (EPS) of that company
(or total earnings per share, E / N):
 (B)
P
t
 =
Kt /
N = (
E /
N) /
r = EPS / r

(A) and (B) here are basic formulas
for price as the index of present value
of future earnings.
19 Horowitz, Art of the Deal, 171.
20 Ibid., 78.
21 Predicating price on finance reverses
neoclassical pricing doctrine, which
drastically changes how the relation
between prices and markets are to
be understood. Rather than markets
setting prices, for Nitzan and Bichler
financialization of art
—
238 239
“modern capitalists are ‘price
makers’: they fix the price of the
product and then let ‘markets forces’
do the rest for them” (242). It is not
that market imperatives set prices
but that prices “set” the market.
While there may indeed be market
forces, such forces are not primarily
those shaping prices but rather those
that prices impose on social, indus
-
trial, and institutional arrangements.
22 Nitzan and Bichler, Capital as Power,
262.
23 As noted, the classical doctrine of
price theory has it that market pres
-
sures and competition generate the
prices set by firms or competitors
for their wares. However, following
the work of Gardiner Means at the
time of the Great Depression, Nitzan
and Bichler emphasize that there are
in fact “two types of prices” (240):
competitively formed market prices
set by standard supply and demand
constraints and also what Means
called “administered prices,” which
are typical of concentrated industries.
Administered prices do not respond
to market circumstances very fast
(if at all) and the firms setting them
do not seek to maximize their profits
but to secure them. Desired profit
rates are set in advance and this, in
addition to “output costs,” determines
prices that are kept relatively stable
(Apple is a good example of one such
firm). In other words, administered
prices are not guided by the market’s
invisible hand. Moreover, studies
show that most prices are adminis
-
tered prices (n. 19, 241). Nitzan and
Bichler turn to Michal Kalecki’s notion
of the “degree of monopoly”
—the
extent of control over prices
—as an
explanation of how and why price
setting is determined by conditions
other than those of market circum
-
stances (242).
24 Nitzan and Bichler, Capital as Power,
239.
25 Ibid., 239.
26 Ibid., 228.
27 Ibid., 249.
28 Ibid., 249.
29 Administered prices demonstrate
two business principles: (i) profit is
maintained by generalizing sabotage
(ibid., 241); (ii) prices are determined
by a target rate of return and the cost
of goods is set to meet this return.
The degree of monopoly is a mea
-
sure of industrial sabotage required
in order to maintain a rate of return.
As the phrase implies, it is a measure
of power: higher prices mark a
greater degree of monopoly over
industry, indexing more power to
sabotage. That is, the greater the
markup that can be set, the greater
the power of those who set it; and
the contrary.
30 Olav Velthuis, Talking Prices: Sym
-
bolic Meanings of Prices on the Mar
-
ket for Contemporary Art (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2005),
24–26.
31 Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A
Social Critique of the Judgment of
Taste, trans. Richard Nice (London:
Routledge, 2003 [1979]).
32 Velthuis, Talking Prices, 26–27.
33 Horowitz, Art of the Deal, 208.
34 The complication in the schematic
formulas of capitalization (A) and
price (B) in n. 18 is that the future is
uncertain, which means that the ba
-
sic variables are in fact unknown and
unmeasurable. But each variable can
be retrospectively decomposed into
the objective aspects of earnings and
rate of return and, on the other hand,
a speculative element that measures
the degree of “expectation” that was
the capitalist’s projection into the
future, itself composed of hype and
confidence in predictions. In detail:
 Expected earnings are first decom
-
posited. For the share-price formula
in particular (188):
 (C)
P
t
 = EEPS /
r = (EPS x
H) /
r
 Where EEPS is expected future
earnings per share, EPS is actual
future earnings per share and
H the
hype coefficient which measures
the extent to which capitalists are
investing optimistically (
H is greater
than one) or pessimistically (H is less
than one). Whether capitalists have
hyped their capitalization up or down
can only be known when their initial
capitalization or price is assessed
against their actual earnings. The
hype coefficient thus “represents the
ex post collective error of capital
-
ists when pricing the asset, and is
revealed only once the earnings are
announced” (189)
—at which point
hype can be measured.
 Nitzan and Bichler remark two
important key characteristics of
hype (191): it actively shapes price
and thus commands markets; it is
not an individual intervention but a
collective-sectoral coalition combin
-
ing regulators, policy-makers, execu
-
tives, opinion-makers, traders, and so
on
—a capitalist ruling elite
—to push
prices up or down and give confi
-
dence that such swings are justified
and rationally explainable. The intro
-
duction of hype in the formulations
of capitalization makes apparent that
investors are not essentially reactive
to market forces through pricing, as
neoclassical precepts have it (208),
and that prices are not automatically
or mechanistically derived from earn
-
ings (just as the market does not set
prices but is “set” by prices).
It is then the earnings projections
of capitalists that are the key factor in
price-setting. Yet these projections
also depend on the confidence of in
-
vestors in their own predictions. This
confidence can be measured against
a benchmark (government bonds,
for example) in which a maximum
certainty of a given rate of return is
assumed. This is called a “risk free”
rate in standard finance theory
though, as Nitzan and Bichler
observe, it is not explained “why it
is risk free nor what determines its
level” (209). By contrast all other
investments have a degree of con
-
fidence that can be measured by
the “risk coefficient” (
∂) that acts as
a factor against the rate of return
in which investors have maximum
confidence (
r
c ). As with hype, confi
-
dence can be incorporated into the
price formula (C) by decompositing
the rate of return:
(D)
P
t
 = EEPS /
r = (EPS x
H) / (
rc
 x
∂)
When confidence is high, the riskcoefficient
is close to one and it
increases when confidence falls
back, resulting in a lower share price
(all other things being equal). The
risk coefficient is not to be confused
with the risk premium described
in standard finance theory, which
claims to measure the risk in prices
and actual volatility, not speculative
confidence. Higher risk premiums
imply higher returns but a higher risk
coefficient means less confidence
and so lower prices.
35 The price per share is the trade off
between how much earnings per
share are hyped-up against the risk
that the shares will not beat a stan
-
dard rate of return. Actual earnings
and the standard rate of return can
both be retrospectively measured.
Though Nitzan and Bichler do not
take their argument in this direction
in Capital as Power, the retrospec
-
tively measured “objective” factors in
price-setting can be separated out
from the right-hand side of formula
(D):
 (E)
P
t
 = (EPS /
r
c ) x (
H /
∂
)
 Implementing this separation allows
the speculative element of pricesetting
to be identified as the tradeoff
between hype and risk. Pricesetting
as it is formulated in (E) can
be split into the following descriptive
terms:

Price per share = (objective return) x
(speculative zeal)

If this formulation corresponds with
a conventional sense of what
—
—
—
240
speculation involves—the anticipatory
“hunch” of the investor who follows
the markets—what is telling about
it is that: (i) subjective speculation
“shapes” the price rather than follows
it (even when there is no hype (H = 1)
and no risk (∂ = 1)), and thus shapes
the future of the market (210); and (ii)
speculative zeal can be given an exact
measure (it is the ratio of the price
per share to its actual return, which is
a number that can only be retrospectively
known). In the words of Jamie
Searle at Citi Bank in the epigraph
to this essay, speculative zeal is the
“positioning” of the speculator who
shapes the market and the future but
whose “accuracy” or “distortion” of
what the price should have been can
only be retrospectively measured.
Speculative fear is when hype is
outweighed by risk (H / ∂ is less
than one); speculative enthusiasm
is when hype outweighs risk
(H / ∂ is more than one). Since the
future is unknown, however, confidence
can never be at a maximum.
And since hype is a sectoral (which is
to say collective-institutional) pressure,
positioning is but the shaping of
price by power. It can be measured
by comparing price to actual earnings,
which is to say: capital accumulation,
profit gained by sabotage.
36 Wuggenig, “Attached by an Umbilical
Cord of Gold,” 62.
37 Horowitz, Art of the Deal, 161, 186,
199–201; Suhail Malik, “A Boom
Without End? Liquidity, Critique
and the Art Market,” Mute: Living in
a Bubble: Credit, Debt and Crisis,
2:6, (2007): 92–99, www.metamute.
org/en/A-Boom-Without-End
-Liquidity-Critique-and-the-Art
market; Andrea Fraser, “L’1%, c’est
moi,” Texte Zur Kunst 83 (September
2011): 114–127.
38 John Elsnor and Roger Cardinal, eds.
The Cultures of Collecting (London:
Reaktion, 1994), 2.
39 Andrea Phillips, “Too Careful: Contemporary
Art’s Public Making,” in
Andrea Phillips and Markus Miessen,
eds., Caring Culture: Art, Architecture
and the Politics of Public Health
(Amsterdam/Berlin: SKOR/Sternberg
Press, 2011).
— —
